# Causal_Analysis_of_observational_data-Fortran-and_the_Intel_Many_Integrated_Core
causal analysis of observational data, Fortran, and the Intel Many Integrated Core (MIC)

# Overview
I open this to very briefly share some of my personal thoughts and hopes for the possibilities of the Intel Many Integrated Core (MIC, Xeon Phi) for the world of causal analysis based on observational data. A brief expert's view to some of the issues related to causal analysis based on observational data can be found here: http://statisticalhorizons.com/prediction-vs-causation-in-regression-analysis

Traditionally, and compared to randomized experiments, causal analysis based on observational data may perform rather poor in many cases. That is because we will almost certainly fail to include all the important influential (causal, mediating) independent variables within a study. In many cases we will not even be able to measure such important variables with observational studies. Fortunately, that situation has largely improved more than a decade ago, at least for certain kinds of observational studies, by a thorough description of some fixed effects regression methods:  https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0761924973?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0761924973&linkCode=xm2&tag=statishorizo-20 <br />
Today, we can estimate quite a few of these fixed effects regression models using the traditional Fortran statistics libraries, take the IMSL for an example.

Causal analysis means to test hypothesis and to check if problems with the data itself may lead to invalid conclusions, simply said. Traditionally we use well working approximations to estimate test statistics, take an influential cases diagnostics for an example. But in many cases, with the more sophisticated methods and data structures, such approximations, and thus the test statistics, may not be available. Also, we may demand additional, more sophisticated test statistics and hypothesis testing that can't be approximated resp. evaluated (easily).

Here comes the Intel MIC into play: Some of us believe that this type of many-core processor, which allows to execute all the traditional Fortran (77) library codes on it, will allow to introduce new and much more sophisticate possibilities into the world of causal reasoning based on observational data. To allow for that, we do need a natural access to the parallel hardware, as we currently try with some success using coarray objects (PGAS). But the main work load of such apps will be done by calls to the traditional Fortran libraries, especially those with the highly efficient Fortran (77) codes.
